#Abstract#

As immigration policies grow with the nation and its political landscape, many narratives are presented to the media regarding the impact immigrants have on native-born workers. Through this paper, I hope to focus on the impact of immigration on labor force participation and see how the real-world impacts vary from those predicted based on theory. Furthermore, I aim to track media coverage regarding immigration policy and note if any changes in labor participation, or deviation from economic theory, could be attributed to media coverage. 

To ensure an analysis that is representative of the nuances within immigration policy, I plan to classify the interactions between native-born workers and immigrants in the following ways: immigrants are high-skilled complements, immigrants are low-skilled complements, immigrants are high-skilled substitutes, and immigrants are low-skilled substitutes. Most media coverage tends to highlight cases where immigrants are viewed as perfect substitutes, but I hope to shed some light on how often that is the case and how variety among immigrant types will yield different economic outcomes. I believe that most deviations from economic theory will coincide with a negative media perception. I hope that with these findings we can begin to understand how to structure more productive conversations surrounding immigration.

As my paper progresses, I hope to establish immigration’s impact on native-born workers ranging from unemployment to discouragement based on the works of Ríos‐Avila (Ríos‐Avila, 2016). Ríos‐Avila utilized the basic monthly Current Population Survey from 2001 and 2013 and identified workers who transition out of unemployment. The results yielded from their multinomial model suggest that immigration does not affect the probability of native-born workers finding a job. I hope to analyze the social landscapes of the states surveyed, and the types of skill levels the immigrants may have had to see how these variables may have influenced the outcome.

Some other works that I hope to analyze include the works of Borjas and Card which highlight trends surrounding native internal migration (Borjas, 2021) (Card, 2001). Following this, I hope to take inspiration from Scheve and establish core differences between theory and literature regarding labor-market competition and immigration policy (Scheve, 2001). Finally, I hope to look at the case study surrounding the effect of the Mariel Boatlift as researched by Card (Card, 1990). After a comprehensive review of existing literature, I hope to introduce a model, inspired by Dustmann, to display the labor market impact of immigration (Dustmann, 2008). 

I hope that this paper can contribute to more nuanced discussions on immigration by highlighting the diversity among immigrant types, their economic impacts, and the impact of media coverage.
